The internet as it exists today is hard to imagine without open standards. The decentralized and ever-evolving nature of it does not fit well with proprietary or incompatible parts. It turns out however, that entities with a preference for long-term stability like archives can greatly benefit from using open standards too. Not necessarily because of interoperability or the lack of royalty payment, but for their longevity. For archives, it is of paramount importance to use formats that will endure, as the use of obsolete formats render an archive inaccessible. While nobody can predict the future, using formats specified by open standards can provide some reassurance in this regard. However, while a long-lasting specification is good, a long-lasting implementation and use of it is even better.

[Maybe insert some quote here about what archives have to deal with when a format becomes obsolete. I seem to remember something about flash video?]

## Audiovisual formats and the IETF
While audiovisual formats and codecs are not commonly described in RFCs, the IETFs principles lend themselves well to it when obsolescence is considered a serious risk. After all, the IETFs staple "rough consensus and running code" is a great way to inspire long lasting use of open standards. This is why the Codec Encoding for LossLess Archiving and Realtime transmission (CELLAR) working group was formed, consisting of developers of an existing audiovisual format, Matroska, and lossless codecs, FFV1 for video and FLAC for audio. A major success to this working group has been two formats described by its documents being marked [as preferred formats by Library of Congress](https://blogs.loc.gov/thesignal/2023/12/embracing-ffv1-matroska-container-preferred/) in their [Recommended Formats Statement (RFS)](https://www.loc.gov/preservation/resources/rfs). Those formats already existed for quite some time, but their specifications were incomplete. Clear and complete specifications make it possible to write an implementation without having to refer to existing ones, which is of course essential in preventing formats becoming unreadable in the long term.

Usually a protocol specification and its first implementation are developed simultaneously, or the implementation follows shortly after the specification. In this case, the three formats and their implementations already existed in one way or another for 20 years. In the FFV1 and Matroska case, this meant the effort was split up: first document the existing format, then follow up with an altered (FFV1) or extended (Matroska) version of the format to address uncovered shortcomings. In the case of FLAC, which is a relatively simple format, it was possible to maintain compatibility except for some not-yet-implemented features the format allowed for.
